(title slide)

Hi, I'm Chris Lilley. I'm a Technical Director at the 
World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) and the W3C representative to the ICC. 
I am also co-editor of CSS Color 3,4,5 and editor of CSS Color HDR.

(slide 2, Overview)

Current activity on HDR at W3C was spearheaded by a workshop we did
in 2021 on Wide Color Gamut and High Dynamic Range on the Web.

Around the same time, work was restarted on the image format 
Portable Network Graphics (PNG); 
there was a proposal to extend HTMl Canvas for HDR,
and another for Cascading Style Sheets, which had already been 
extended to WCG starting in 2016.

(slide 3, Selected workshop outcomes)

The workshop report
https://www.w3.org/Graphics/Color/Workshop/report.htm
identified a number of next steps, including:

- the need for browsers to support ile formats for 2D image HDR distribution
- further investigation of HDR tone mapping
- prototyping to proposal for HDR in Canvas
- improving WCG Interoperability for CSS

(slide 4, Portable Network Graphics)

The PNG specification, whose second edition was jointly published in 2003
by W3C and by ISO (as  ISO/IEC 15948:2003), was in need of maintenance
for clarification, corrections and errata
(for example due to the age of the specification, it only allowed 
version 2 ICC profiles, although in practice implementations accepted v4 as well); 
there was also a desire to incorporate the widely implemented, 
but unofficial, extensions for Animated PNG, 
to add EXIF to the main specification 
(it had been loosely defined in an extensions document)
and as already said,to extend PNG to support HDR imagery.

Compatibility with existing images and decoders was seen as critical.

(slide 5, PNG)

Labelling of HDR content was done by referring to Coding Independent Code Points,
defined in the freely available specification ITU-T H.273
which is widely used for video content and also 
in still image or image-sequence formats such as AVIF and JPEG-XL.

Numerical codes identify the primary and white chromaticities,
the transfer function,
the matrix to convert to RGB (if applicable)
and whether the data is narrow-range or full-range.
For example, Hybrid Log Gamma BT.2100 content uses the (decimal) values
9 for chromaticities (same for PQ and for BT.2020 SDR),
18 for the HLG transfer function,
00 to indicate the data is already RGB,
and in this case 01 to indicate full-range data.

The same signalling method can identify some SDR formats;
for example Display P3.

In contrast to ICC profiles, only a select number of formats can be labelled;
for example ProPhoto RGB cannot be so described.
However, the labelling is very compact, with only four data bytes.

Chrome and Safari already implement CICP in PNG and other image formats;
Firefox supports it in AVIF and is expected to add PNG support soon.

(slide 6, PNG)

It's common for image and video content  not to use the 
entire theoretical color volume. 
Not just for artistic reasons, but also because the delivery method
might mandate a larger color space.

Calculating the actual frame-by-frame or scene-by scene color usage
is computationally expensive and not necessarily desirable
if that would cause gamut or tone mapping to vary.

A useful and content-independent upper bound can be established
simply by recording the characteristics
(chromaticities, minimum and maximum luminance)
of the reference display used for content creation or final grading.
This is specified by SMPTE ST 2086,
a specification which (following a request from W3C) is now freely available.

For example,
content is often graded on a display with DCI P3 primaries, a D65 white point,
with a maximum peak luminance of 2,000 cd/m² and 
a minimum black luminance of 0.02 cd/m.
It is then delivered as BT.2100 PQ,
which has a significantly wider color gamut
and a theoretical peak luminance of 10,000 cd/m².

PNG Third Edition enables MDCV to be recorded,
adding only 24 data bytes and fitting into existing content workflows.

(slide 7, PNG)

Consistent tone mapping is aided by summary information on 
content luminance levels. 
It would not be practical, particularly for animations or for streaming content,
to analyze this in real time.

SMPTE ST-2067-21 defines two mmetrics:
the mean luminance of the brightest frame,
and the luminance of the brightest pixel
(in practice, typically filtered to remove outliers).

PNG Third Edition enables CLLI to be recorded,
adding only 8 data bytes.

(slide 8, HDR in HTML Canvas)

This will be covered by Christopher Cameron in a separate presentation.

(slide 9, Cascading Style Sheets)

Turning now from image formats to CSS, which is used
to describe the color and formatting of web pages.

(slide 10, CSS Color 4)

The early web was a firmly sRGB-only environment.

In 2016, with the widespread availability of WCG screens
on laptops, tablets and phones,
CSS Color 4 defined how to use WCG colors in CSS.
The focus was (deliberately) on standard dynamic range 
and media white-relative colorimetry.

In addition to sRGB it also added Display P3, ProPhoto RGB,
BT.2020, and CIE XYZ (with either D50 or D65 white points).

To permit color manipulation in a perceptually uniform space,
CIE Lab and LCH(ab) were added and then, later,
Oklab and Oklch which have improved hue linearity and hue uniformity,
avoiding the need to use computationally complex ΔE2000

(slide 11, CSS Color 4)

In addition to defining these various color models,
sample code was provided for color conversion.
In the case of differing white points,
the linear Bradford CAT is used, as with ICC.

Color interpolation is also defined between any two colors;
the color definitions and the color space used for interpolation
need not be the same.
Special attention is given to interpolating in polar spaces
with near-neutrals, whose hue is ill-conditioned.

CSS Images 4 uses this to specify the color space used 
for color gradient interpolation.

(slide 12, Media Queries 5)

Conditional logic allows broad categories of displau device
to be distinguished:
standard, wide, and ultrawide gamuts,
and standard or high dynamic range.

(slide 13, CSS Color HDR)

When defining CSS Color 4 as SDR-only,
it was necessary to verify that later expansion to HDR was possible,
in other words, to check we were not painting ourselves into a corner.

I wrote an unofficial draft which proposed the use of BT.2100 (both RGB forms, 
and also ICtCp as a perceptually uniform space).
Jzazbz and the corresponding polar form, JzCzHz, were also defined.

ICtCp could be used for color mixing and distance estimation (ΔEITP)

This draft was recently adopted by the CSS Working Group,
and a linear-light form of BT.2100 was also added at that time.

It is too early to see browser implementations,
although all these color spaces are implemented 
in the JavaScript library color.js
https://colorjs.io/

(last slide 14,  CSS Color HDR)

Even more recently (last week), the CSS WG
adopted a proposal by Christopher Cameron
to define a property to limit the degree of HDR
on a per-page or even per-element basis.

The constrained-high value is defined to be
"enough HDR" to allow comfortable viewing of SDR and HDR content side by side,
for example in an image gallery.

For privacy reasons the exact number of stops of HDR headroom
is not exposed to the platform
(otherwise a web page could track, for example, when a user moves outdoors)
but the implementation has access to this internally,
so that the values may be smoothly animated.
For example, in an image gallery,
hovering over an image or displaying it larger
could smoothly bring it to full HDR.

Thank you for your attention.
